ok. Today's topic is workout and i made a mindmap to demonstrate it. we can learn english that can be used in gym along the way. so next time when you meet a foreign guy in gym, you can approach him, be friends and maybe even let him spot you. 
First, let's classify different types of workout. let's break down different types of workouts. We've got bodybuilding, powerlifting, HIIT (which stands for High-Intensity Interval Training), CrossFit, and many more. Since I'm not super familiar with powerlifting, HIIT, or CrossFit, let’s dive into the one I'm most familiar with — bodybuilding. So inside of bodybuilding, uhhh, In mandarin Chinese we have a saying called "吃练睡" which means eating, training and sleeping. These are the three most important factors for muscle growth. So in mindmap we got training, diet and sleep here. Let's see training section, we can break training into two parts -- cardio and strength training. first let's see cardo, i know, i know, not many amateur bodybuilders enjoy cardio. but from personal experience and some research results, cardio is actually pretty good. Your respiratory and cardiovascular systems work together to deliver oxygen you breathe in, to all parts of your body, and doing regular cardio exercise sessions strengthens both of these systems and many of the organs in these systems. 

cardio, for example, running on treadmill. oh sorry not this one, what the frick is this guy doing. It should be the one below. Another common machines are elliptical and stair climbing machine. 

okay let's move on to strength training equipment. Dumbbell, you can use dumbbell to do curl. `Then we can see barbell, barbell is longer and can put mpore weights compared with dumbbell. we can use barbell to do bench press, the top tier exercise for developing pecs. Then we can also use it to do incline bench press target for upper chest. okay then we got lat pulldown machine. Lat is short for latissimus dorsi. It's so hard to pronounce. okay now move to smith machine. Smith machine is very user-friendly, if you are beginner, i highly recommend you using smith machine. okay next one is hack squat machine, it's used to build your quads, you can squat really deep using this machine. alright that's basically the training part. now let's talk about diet, in bodybuilding, most of time we divide foods into 3 categories: carbohydrates, protein and fat. Carbohydrates include things like rice, noodles, steamed bun or baozi and so on. Because of social media, a lot of people are so focused on protein, but actually i think carbs matters more. You know, we have carb cycling and keto diet, things like that. Most of time we are adjusting carbs or fats to control our calories intake. protein is actually fairly simple, just consume enough protein and aim for good protein like eggs, meat and milk. If you can't afford to eat meat everyday or you don't have a big stomach, using protein powder is a good option. In fat, we have salmon, avocado, almond and so on. okay, now move on to sleep part. In sleep section we actually don't have too many things to talk about. Cortisol is a steriod hormone produced by adrenal glands in response to stress and low blood glucose levels.For bodybuilders, managing cortisol levels is crucial. High cortisol can negatively affect sleep. Melatonin is a hormone produced by the pineal gland in the brain, primarily responsible for regulating the body's sleep-wake cycle. Melatonin can be obtained exogenously. Pills or gummies like this. Personally, i never had sleep issues. But if you do, maybe melatonin can be helpful, but ask doctors at first. okay, that's the end of the video, thanks for watching. If you like my content, please hit subscribe button. I will make more mindmap videos like this. Until next time, see you !